Notes/transcript for presentation.

File: bat-training4.pdf

Slide 1: no notes

Slide 2: The Binary Analysis Tool has a simple viewer that allows you to view
and browse results of a scan (stored as a tar archive) in a simple graphical
interface.

Slide 3: The BAT results viewer needs to be configured for some functionality
to work. The configuration file can either be loaded through the interface, or
be supplied on the commandline.

Slide 4: In the configuration file there is one section that is specific for
the viewer. Right now the only thing that is specifically for the viewer that
can be configured it is the location of a directory of pregenerated pretty
printed source code in HTML.

Slide 5: Opening a result file in the BAT results viewer is simple: via
File -> Open a file selection menu will be opened, after which a file can be
loaded. The results file will be unpacked. On the left there will be a file
tree that can be browsed, on the right results will be displayed in tabs.

Slide 6: Because not every file will be interesting it is possible to filter
uninteresting files from the file tree. Especially in larger firmwares, such
as Android images, there can be thousands of files, like graphics files or
text files or Android resource files, that are not directly interesting for
license compliance engineering, but which clutter the interface and which make
it easy to get lost in the amount of data.

The filter can be configured via Configuration -> Filter Configuration.

Slide 7: For each file a few attributes (as far as applicable) will be shown,
like size, checksum, tags, file name, and absolute and relative paths.
Depending on the file some other results (like scan results, architecture, list
of dynamically linked libraries) might be shown as well.

Slide 8: The advanced ranking scan will give access to a lot more information,
like unique function names, or which strings were matched to a database of
strings and possibly a version number guess, if enough data is available.

This information should be carefully inspected and not blindly trusted.

Slide 9: no notes

Slide 10: Interpreting the string constants takes some care. To make a good
classification of a program it is important to look at how many strings are
matched and how they are distributed over the various packages. An even
distribution of the score, with very few matched strings, is a clear miss and
means that nothing has been recognized.

If there are only a few strings that can be recognized (whether unique or
non-unique) also means that the results are likely to be not very good either.
In short: the more strings that can be recognized, the better the fidelity.

Slide 11: Version numbers are determined based on the amount of unique strings.
If there are enough unique strings it is possible to reliably guess the version
number of the program because there are slight differences between strings
between versions.

If just a few unique strings were matched then version guessing will not be
very reliable.

Slide 12: The BAT results viewer has an "advanced mode" which can provide a
different view on files, namely a graphical representation and a text
representation (created with hexdump) of the file. For most files this is not
necessary at all (and so this mode is disabled by default), but it can be
useful to for example see where in a firmware file offsets can be found, or if
a file is compressed, or encrypted, or if there are any other patterns in the
file.

For this advanced mode to work the files have to be generated by BAT in these
representations (postrun scans "images" and "hexdump" have to be enabled). The
generated files can be really big and slow down the interface significantly, so
it is not enabled by default.

Slide 13: Scanning via the BAT results viewer is also possible (Linux systems
only), but not recommended: it can take long time to scan a large file, even on
a machines with fast SSD disks, many cores and plenty of memory.

Slide 14: no notes
