Notes/transcript for presentation.

File: bat-training5.pdf

Slide 1: no notes

Slide 2: In this course we look at extending the Binary Analysis Tool and look
at adding new identifiers and new scans.

Slide 3: Identifiers of supported compressed files, file systems and media
files are hardcoded in a file in the BAT source tree, namely bat/fsmagic.py.
The structure is a simple Python dictionary called "fsmagic" that can easily be
extended.

Depending on the file type the identifier might start at the beginning of the
file, the end of the file, or somewhere after the beginning of the file. For
identifiers that start after the beginning of the file a special dictionary
with "correction" offsets should also be modified.

A new identifier will only be scanned as soon as there is a scan that actually
uses it and declares it in the configuration file in the "magic" configuration
parameter.

Slide 4: Identifiers can be used in scans by accessing the dictionary "offsets"
that is passed to each of the scans. The keys for the dictionary are the same
keys as in the "fsmagic" dictionary.

Slide 5: Prerun scans are used to quickly tag files. It takes a few parameters
including the offsets and previous tags that were given to the file and returns
a list of new tags the scan has found.

Slide 6: no comments

Slide 7: Unpacking scans try to carve a file out of a larger file and unpack
its contents. Parameters to methods include a blacklist, which contains tuples
of with start/end values of byte ranges in the file that should be ignored,
since these ranges have already been scanned for example by another unpack
scan.

The return value of an unpack scan should be a list with three values:
1. a list of tuples containing the names of directories where files have been
unpacked and the byte offset in the original file where the compressed file or
file system or media file can be found
2. an updated blacklist to which new byte ranges have been added in case of
successful unpacking
3. a list of tags, the same as are returned by prerun scans

Slide 8: a new file scan is fairly simple and only has a few parameters, namely
the full path of the file, the blacklist with byte ranges that should be
ignored, and environment variables.

The result can be an arbitrary Python value. Depending on if XML output is
enabled it might be necessary to write a custom XML pretty printer for return
values that are more complex than basic types (integer, boolean, float,
strings).

Slide 9: no comments

Slide 10: Writing a XML pretty printer for file scans is not difficult. There
are three parameters: the result of the scan, a top level XML node for creating
new XML nodes, plus optional environment variables.

The result should be a valid XML node.

Slide 11: no comments

Slide 12: Postrun scans do not alter the scan results, but merely process them
to for example create a different representation of the results, like reports
or graphics.

The parameters are the results of the previous scans, plus some extra meta
information like paths in the file system and environment variables.

There is no return value for post run scans.

Slide 13: no comments
